Final Project
The purpose of this Project is to help you to be prepared to analyze datasets in your future studies and
career.
Besides your notebook you must write a report (in pdf or word) that summarizes the problem, data,
procedure and your findings, understandings, and interpretations. Remember the report is oriented to
people such as your managers, who are not machine Learning experts, therefore the report needs to
reflect this fact.
For the main body of the report, please be concise (possibly 2 ∼ 8 pages) and easy-understanding. Use
the descriptive tables/figures to summarize your results (instead of blindly copying and pasting Python
output).
The final delivery will be to upload your report and your notebook in Canvas. You can work in teams of
up to three members. Only one of the group members will submit the 2 files. I will add an extra question
or upload so each of you can divide a fictional $3,000 into each of your teammates in the proportions
you believe reflect your and their participation in the project. This means that if the split of the money is
even ($1,000 each), all your teammates work the same, but if you did all the work you can collect all the
money ($3,000) and not share it with your teammates ($0).
Problem
1. Data
Consider the well-known zipcode data set in the machine learning and data mining literature, which is
available in this web site,
https://hastie.su.domains/ElemStatLearn/datasets/zip.train.gz
The datasets download as a zip files that you’ll need to extract. The extracted file is a space separated file
and not comma separated (csv). You can apply different approaches such as open it in Excel, separate it
in columns and save it as a csv, or you could add the following parameter, sep='\s+’, to your regular read
command in python.
You can find the description of the dataset in the following address,
https://hastie.su.domains/ElemStatLearn/datasets/zip.info.txt
In this section describe the dataset, the source, the problem, etc.
2. EDA
Report some summary information/statistics of training data that you think are important or interesting,
but please do not just copy and paste the results — you need to be selective and use your own language
to write up some sentences to summarize those important or interesting results).
Plot some of the rows to make sense of the data. (Suggestions, use seaborn heatmap. If you are
advanced in Python, you can use a loop to plot a few lines, if not repeating the code is fine. You will need
to reshape the row back to a 16x16 NumPy matrix to be able to plot it).
3. Modeling
Use at least 3 of the Machine Learning algorithms studied in class, use the whole dataset to train your
models.
You could approach the problem as different models per each digit (separating the dataset in 10 data
frames one per each digit) and training the models to predict a specific digit (binary result). Or you can
approach it as a multi-classification problem (same dataset) your predicted response will be one of the
digits.
Notes:
● If you use KNN use the elbow method to get the best K
● If you use Logistic regression or SVM for multi-classification, try the "one-vs-one" or "one-vs-all"
strategy which translates to adding a parameter in the function called
“decision_function_shape”. Ex. decision_function_shape='ovo' for one-vs-one strategy.
● If you use Random Forest, play with the depth of the trees.
4. Results
Test your models using the test data available in this address,
https://hastie.su.domains/ElemStatLearn/datasets/zip.test.gz
Use error_rate or accuracy to evaluate your models. Report the results and your best performer model.
Plot the confusion matrix in each case and report if your best model performs well for all digits or there
are some other models that perform better in specific digits.
Report
Include the following sections in your report,
● Introduction (problem statement and dataset description)
● EDA
● Methods and Methodology used
● Findings and Conclusion
